we're about to put one dog's nose to the
ultimate test
Neil Powell is an expert who trains
sniffer dogs
one of his top performers is
search-and-rescue dog fern
today she's going to try to sniff out
something neil has hidden a canister
containing pork meat but what's
extraordinary is that it's not on dry
land it's in the lake deep under water
what we want to do is pick for a note
and use her sounding ability and try to
pinpoint it this isn't just a stunt it's
serious work fern has been trained to
detect the bodies of people who's
drowned
so this is an ultimate test of the dog
selling ability it's it's probably as
difficult as it gets
Neal and the dive team know precisely
where the canister is hidden because
they fixed a GPS position on it the
question is can fern even get close the
team's search technique is to
systematically crisscross the lake so at
some point fern will be brought directly
downwind of the hidden rule but will she
pick up the scent of the decaying meat
the lake is a mile long and half a mile
wide and only the tiniest quantities of
chemicals from the meat will be reaching
the surface
of that most will be getting blown away
[Music]
and yet around ten minutes after they
start to criss cross the lake sensor
surfing
hurry up the work John
once she's indicated on this sentiment
we'll take her out of the sound room as
quickly as we can so then she stops
barking and knowing what we've tried and
tried to do is work our way down wind
again Criss crossing the wind until she
starts to bark again Neal and the search
team have honed their partnership with
firm to an arc Neal can tell from ferns
body language when they're at the exact
spot place your right over the top of it
you'll see got over the side and a
little bit more she's really focused on
the quarter you're getting right into
Sunday they're done bring around their
job right Ryan job there John
ferns made it clear where she thinks the
canister is Neal is confident she's got
the right spot and so he drops the
marker empty but there's only one way to
know if ferns correct the dive team move
in to check it against the GPS fix they
took when they threw in the canister
and unbelievably fern is right on top of
it in a lake a kilometer wide and half a
kilometer long ferns nose has found the
exact spot the divers final job is to
try and retrieve the canister for the
lakebed as a surprise in store
the bottom is a meter of soft silt and
the canister has sunk right through the
dive team don't stand a chance
amazingly fern hasn't just sniffed the
lure through six meters of water but
also through our meter mud as well
[Music]
you